The Processor
Chapter 4
Part I
Computer
Devices
Memory
Processor
Chapter 4.Part I 1of 58
Patterson and Hennessy’s Computer Organization and Design, 5th Ed.
Agenda and Reading List
• Chapter goals
• Introduction (4.1, pp. 300-303)
• ISA summary (4.4, p. 319)
• Generic implementation (4.1, pp. 301-303)
• Clocking methodology (4.2, pp. 303-307)
• Building a datapath (4.3, pp. 307-313)
• Creating a single datapath (4.3, pp. 313-315)
• A simple implementation scheme (4.4, pp. 316-330)
• The ALU control (4.4, pp. 316-318)
• The main control unit (4.4, pp. 318-321)
• The operation of the datapath (4.4, pp. 321-327)
• Implementing unconditional jumps (4.4, p. 328)
• Inefficiencies in the single-cycle implementation (4.4, pp. 328-330)
Chapter 4.Part I 2of 58
Patterson and Hennessy’s Computer Organization and Design, 5th Ed.
Chapter Goals
• to explain the principles and techniques used in implementing a 
modern RISC processor, starting with a highly abstract and 
simplified overview
• to develop an understanding of combinational and clocked 
sequential circuits and the relationship between them
• to see how the ISA determines many aspects of the implementation
• to discuss how the choice of various implementation strategies 
affects the clock rate and CPI for the computer
• to construct the datapath, ALU control unit, and main control unit 
for a single-cycle implementation of the MIPS instruction set
Chapter 4.Part I 3of 58
Patterson and Hennessy’s Computer Organization and Design, 5th Ed.
Introduction
• The implementation of the processor determines both the clock cycle 
time and the number of clock cycles per instruction (CPI)
• We will be examining an implementation that includes a subset of the 
core MIPS instruction set:– The memory-reference instructions:  lw, sw – The arithmetic-logical instructions:  add, sub, and, or, slt– The control flow (branch and jump) instructions:  beq, j
• A simple implementation that uses a single long clock cycle for 
every instruction will be shown– Every instruction begins execution on one clock edge and 
completes execution on the next clock edge– While easier to understand, this approach is not practical
• since the clock cycle must be stretched to accommodate the 
longest instruction
• it leads to a slow implementation
• We will concentrate on designing the control– Control is the most challenging aspect of the processor design– It is the hardest part to get right and to make fast
Chapter 4.Part I 4of 58
Patterson and Hennessy’s Computer Organization and Design, 5th Ed.
ISA Summary
Field bit positions
No. of bits
31-26
6
R-format op
I-format
op
J-format op
25-21
5
rs
rs
20-16
5
rt
rt
15-11
5
rd
10-6
5
5-0
6
shamt funct
16- bit immediate/address
26-bit address
• The opcode field, op[5:0] is always contained in bits 31:26
• The two registers to be read are always specified by the rs and rt fields 
at positions 25:21 and 20:16
• The base register for lw and sw is always in bit positions 25:21 (rs)
• The 16-bit offset for lw, sw, and beq is always in bit positions 15:0
• The destination register is either– in bit positions 20:16 (rt) for lw or – in bit positions 15:11 (rd) for an R-format instruction
Chapter 4.Part I 5of 58
Patterson and Hennessy’s Computer Organization and Design, 5th Ed.
Patterson and Hennessy’s Computer Organization and Design, 5th Ed. Chapter 4.Part I 6of 58
ISA Summary (cont.)
Instruction Format op funct Instruction Format op funct
add R 010 3210 lw I 35
addi I 8 nor R 0 39
and R 0 36 or R 0 37
andi I 12 ori I 13
beq I 4 sb I 40
bne I 5 sh I 41
j J 2 sll R 0 0
jal J 3 slt R 0 42
jr R 0 8 slti I 10
lb I 32 srl R 0 2
lh I 33 sub R 0 34
lui I 15 sw I 43
Patterson and Hennessy’s Computer Organization and Design, 5th Ed. Chapter 4.Part I 7of 58
ISA Summary (cont.)
•MIPS Registers
Name Register number
(decimal) Usage Preserve on
call?
$zero 0 the constant value 0 n.a.
$at 1 reserved for the assembler n.a.
$v0-$v1 2-3 procedure return values and expression
evaluation no
$a0-$a3 4-7 procedure arguments (parameters) no
$t0-$t7 8-15 temporary registers no 
$s0-$s7 16-23 general purpose saved registers yes
$t8-$t9 24-25 more temporary registers no
$k0-$k1 26-27 reserved for the OS n.a.
$gp 28 global pointer yes
$sp 29 stack pointer yes
$fp 30 frame pointer yes
$ra 31 procedure return address yes
ISA Summary (cont.)
• MIPS Addressing Modes– Immediate addressing: the operand is a constant within the instruction
addi $s1, $s2, 100– Register addressing: the operand is a register
add $s1, $s2, $s3– Base or displacement addressing: the operand is at the memory 
location whose address is the sum of a register and a constant in the 
instruction
lw
$s1, 100 ($s2)– PC-relative addressing: the address is the sum of the current PC and a 
constant (multiplied by 4) in the instruction
beq $s1, $s2, 100
2500– Pseudodirect addressing: the jump address is a constant (26 bits) in the 
instruction (multiplied by 4) concatenated with the upper 4 bits of the PC
j
Chapter 4.Part I 8of 58
Patterson and Hennessy’s Computer Organization and Design, 5th Ed.
ISA Summary (cont.)
• MIPS Addressing Modes (cont.)
Chapter 4.Part I 9of 58
Patterson and Hennessy’s Computer Organization and Design, 5th Ed.
Clocking Methodology
• There are two different types of logic elements:
1. elements that operate on data values (combinational), e.g., ALU
2. elements that contain state (sequential), e.g., memory and registers
cycle time
rising edge
falling edge
• A clocking methodology is used in synchronous systems to define when 
signals can be read and when they can be written
• An edge-triggered clocking methodology will be used:– Values stored in a state element are updated only on a clock edge– State elements update their internal storage on clock edges– As only state elements can store a data value, any collection of 
combinational logic must have its inputs come from a set of state 
elements and its outputs written into a set of state elements– The inputs are values written in a previous clock cycle, while the 
outputs are values that can be used in the following clock cycle
Chapter 4.Part I 10 of 58
Patterson and Hennessy’s Computer Organization and Design, 5th Ed.
Clocking Methodology (cont.)
• All signals must propagate from state element 1, through the 
combinational logic, and to state element 2 in the time of one cycle
• The time necessary for the signals to reach state element 2 defines 
the length of the clock cycle
• The value stored in a state element is changed only when the write 
control signal is asserted and a clock edge occurs
• Clock signals are not shown
• For simplicity, write control signals will not be shown when a state 
element is written on every active clock edge
Chapter 4.Part I 11 of 58
Patterson and Hennessy’s Computer Organization and Design, 5th Ed.
Clocking Methodology (cont.)
• An edge-triggered methodology allows doing all of the following in 
the same clock cycle:– reading the contents of a register– sending the value read through some combinational logic– writing back to that register
• Feedback cannot occur within one clock cycle because of the edge
triggered update of the state element
Chapter 4.Part I 12 of 58
Patterson and Hennessy’s Computer Organization and Design, 5th Ed.
Generic Implementation
• Much of what needs to be done to implement the instructions is the 
same, independent of the exact class of instruction
• For every instruction, the first two implementation steps are identical:– use PC to fetch the instruction from the instruction memory– use the instruction fields to select one or two registers to read:
• lw requires reading only one register
• j does not require accessing any register
• All other instructions require reading two registers
• After these two steps, the actions required to complete the instruction 
depend on the instruction class
• ISA simplicity and regularity:– simplifies the implementation by making the execution of many of 
the instruction classes similar
• Within a class, actions are largely independent of exact opcode
Chapter 4.Part I 13 of 58
Patterson and Hennessy’s Computer Organization and Design, 5th Ed.
Generic Implementation (cont.)
Chapter 4.Part I 14 of 58
Patterson and Hennessy’s Computer Organization and Design, 5th Ed.
Generic Implementation (cont.)
• There are some similarities across different instruction classes, e.g., – All instruction classes, except j, use the ALU after reading the registers:
• Memory-reference instructions use the ALU for an address calculation
• Arithmetic-logical instructions use it for the operation execution
• The branch instruction (beq) uses it for comparison– After using the ALU, the actions required to complete various instruction 
classes differ:
• A memory-reference instruction accesses the data memory either to 
write data for a store or read data for a load
• An arithmetic-logical instruction writes the data from the ALU back 
into a register
• A load instruction writes the data from the memory back into a 
register
• A branch instruction may need to change the next instruction address 
based on the comparison; otherwise the PC should be incremented 
by 4 to get the address of the next instruction
Chapter 4.Part I 15 of 58
Patterson and Hennessy’s Computer Organization and Design, 5th Ed.
Generic Implementation (cont.)
Chapter 4.Part I 16 of 58
Patterson and Hennessy’s Computer Organization and Design, 5th Ed.
Datapath Elements (1)
• Datapath element: A functional unit used to operate on or hold data within 
a processor
• Instruction memory:– Stores and supplies the instructions of a program given an address– No read signal is needed as it is read every clock cycle– This memory is not written
• Program counter (PC): – Holds the address of the current instruction (to be fetched)– No write signal is needed as it is written every clock cycle
• PC adder:– Used to increment the PC to the address of the next instruction– A combinational circuit that can be built from the ALU by writing the 
control line so that the control always specifies an add operation
Chapter 4.Part I 17 of 58
Patterson and Hennessy’s Computer Organization and Design, 5th Ed.
Building a Datapath (1)
• Instruction fetch and PC increment:– To execute any instruction, we must start by fetching the 
instruction from the instruction memory– To prepare for executing the next instruction, we must also 
increment the PC so that it points at the next instruction, 4 
bytes later
Thick lines (with no 
width indication) indicate
buses of 32 bits
Chapter 4.Part I 18 of 58
Patterson and Hennessy’s Computer Organization and Design, 5th Ed.
Datapath Elements (2)
• Register file:– A collection of the processor 32 general-purpose registers in 
which any register can be read or written by specifying its 
number in the file– The register file contains the register state of the computer– No read control signal is needed
• The register file always outputs the contents of whatever 
register numbers are on the read register inputs– Writes are controlled by the write control signal (RegWrite)
• must be asserted for a write to occur at the clock edge– Since writes to the register file are edge triggered, the design 
can legally read and write the same register within a clock 
cycle:
• The read will get the value written in an earlier clock cycle
• The value written will be available to read in a subsequent 
clock cycle
Chapter 4.Part I 19 of 58
Patterson and Hennessy’s Computer Organization and Design, 5th Ed.
Datapath Elements (2) (cont.)
• Arithmetic and logic unit:– The ALU is used to operate on the values read from the 
registers– It takes 2 32-bit inputs and produces a 32-bit result, as well as a 
1-bit signal if the result is zero– It is controlled by a 4-bit control signal (ALU operation)
Chapter 4.Part I 20 of 58
Patterson and Hennessy’s Computer Organization and Design, 5th Ed.
Building a Datapath (2)
• Executing R-format instructions:  (add $t1, $t2, $t3):– Read 2 data words from the register file, for each we need to input the 
register number (5 bits) to the register file and there will be an output 
(32 bits) that will carry the value that has been read from the registers– Perform an ALU operation on the contents of the registers– Write one data word result into the register file, for which we need two 
inputs: one (5 bits) to specify the register number to be written and 
another to supply the data (32 bits) to be written into the register
Read
Instruction
register 1
Read
register 2
Write
register
Write
data
Read
data 1
Registers
Read
data 2
RegWrite
4
ALU
ALU operation
Zero
ALU
result
Chapter 4.Part I 21 of 58
Patterson and Hennessy’s Computer Organization and Design, 5th Ed.
Datapath Elements (3)
• Sign-extension unit:– Sign-extends the 16-bit offset field in the instruction to a 32-bit 
signed value– Replicates the high-order sign bit of the original data item in the 
high-order bits of the larger, destination data item
• Data memory:– To be read from or written to– It must to be written on store instructions; hence, it has both 
read and write control signals, an address input, and an input 
for the data to be written into memory
Chapter 4.Part I 22 of 58
Patterson and Hennessy’s Computer Organization and Design, 5th Ed.
Patterson and Hennessy’s Computer Organization and Design, 5th Ed. Chapter 4.Part I 23of 58
•Executing loads/stores (lw $t1, 4($t2)/sw $t1, 4($t2)):–Compute a memory address by adding the base register to the 
16-bit signed offset field contained in the instruction–If the instruction is a store, the value to be stored must also be 
read from the register file–If the instruction is a load, the value read from memory must be 
written into the register file in the specified register
Building a Datapath (3)
Instruction
16 32
Registers
Write
register
Read
data 1
Read
data 2
Read
register 1
Read
register 2
Data
memory Write
data
Read
data
Write
data
Sign
extend
ALU
result
Zero
ALU
Address
MemRead
MemWrite
RegWrite
ALUoperation 4
Building a Datapath (3) (cont.)
• Executing R-format instructions and memory instructions:
Chapter 4.Part I 24 of 58
Patterson and Hennessy’s Computer Organization and Design, 5th Ed.
Building a Datapath (4)
• Executing beq instructions (beq $t1, $t2, 5):– Compute the branch target address by adding the sign-extended 
offset field of the instruction to the PC that was incremented by 4
• Shift left the sign-extended offset by 2 bits as it is a word offset– Compare the register contents to determine whether the next 
instruction is the one that follows sequentially or the instruction at the 
branch target address
• Send the two register operands to the ALU to subtract them
• If the two operands are equal, the Zero signal out of the ALU will 
be asserted
• If the condition is true (operands are equal), the branch target 
address becomes the new PC (the branch is taken)
• If the condition is false (operands are not equal), the incremented 
PC replaces the current PC (the branch is not taken)
• Executing j instructions (j 95):– Replace the lower 28 bits of the PC with the lower 26 bits of the 
instruction shifted left by 2 bits (concatenate 00 to the jump offset)
Chapter 4.Part I 25 of 58
Patterson and Hennessy’s Computer Organization and Design, 5th Ed.
Building a Datapath (4) (cont.)
• Jinstructions are not supported in this diagram
Chapter 4.Part I 26 of 58
Patterson and Hennessy’s Computer Organization and Design, 5th Ed.
Creating a Single Datapath
• The simplest datapath executes all instructions in one clock cycle
• This means that no datapath resource can be used more than once 
per instruction– Any element needed more than once, must be duplicated
• We therefore need a memory for instructions separate from the one 
for data
• Many of the datapath elements can be shared by different 
instruction flows
• A multiplexor (data selector) is used to share a datapath element 
between two different instruction classes– It allows multiple connections to the input of an element– It has a control signal to select among the multiple inputs
Chapter 4.Part I 27 of 58
Patterson and Hennessy’s Computer Organization and Design, 5th Ed.
Creating a Single Datapath (cont.)
• The key difference between the three datapaths are:– The second input to the ALU unit is one of two things, it is either
• a register, if it is an R-format instruction or 
• the sign-extended lower half of the instruction, if it is a lw or sw
instruction
• So, place a multiplexor at the second input to the ALU unit– The value stored into a destination register comes from
• the ALU, if it is an R-format instruction or
• memory, if it is a memory load instruction
• So, place a multiplexor at the data input to the register file
• A multiplexor (with a selector control signal RegDst) is needed to select 
the field of instruction used to indicate the register number to be written– bit positions 20:16 (rt) for lw or – bit positions 15:11 (rd) for an R-format instruction
• Add the instruction fetch portion of the datapath
Chapter 4.Part I 28 of 58
Patterson and Hennessy’s Computer Organization and Design, 5th Ed.
Creating a Single Datapath (cont.)
• The branch instruction uses the main ALU for comparison of the 
register operands– So, an adder is needed for computing the branch target address– An additional multiplexor is required to select either the 
sequentially following instruction address (PC+4) or the branch 
target address to be written into the PC
• PCSrc is set if the instruction is beq and the ALU Zero output is true– PCSrc is generated by ANDing together the Branch signal from 
the control unit and the Zero signal out of the ALU
Chapter 4.Part I 29 of 58
Patterson and Hennessy’s Computer Organization and Design, 5th Ed.
Creating a Single Datapath (cont.)
• Jinstructions are not supported in this diagram
Chapter 4.Part I 30 of 58
Patterson and Hennessy’s Computer Organization and Design, 5th Ed.
Creating a Single Datapath (cont.)
PCSrc
Chapter 4.Part I 31 of 58
Patterson and Hennessy’s Computer Organization and Design, 5th Ed.
The ALU Control
• ALU has four control inputs
ALU control lines
0000
0001
0010
0110
0111
1100
Function
and
or
add
sub
slt
nor
• Depending on the instruction class, the ALU will need to perform one 
of the first five functions:– lwand sw: the ALU computes the memory address by addition– R-format: the ALU performs one of the actions (and, or, sub, 
add, slt), depending on the value of the 6-bit funct field– beq: the ALU must perform a subtraction
• nor is needed for other parts of the MIPS ISA
Chapter 4.Part I 32 of 58
Patterson and Hennessy’s Computer Organization and Design, 5th Ed.
The ALU Control (cont.)
• A small ALU control unit (combinational circuit) generates the 4-bit ALU 
control input– This unit has as inputs the instruction funct field of the instruction and 
a 2-bit control field (ALUOp) from the main control unit– ALUOp indicates whether the operation to be performed should be:
add (00)
sub (01)
determined by funct (10)
for loads and stores
for beq
for R-format
• Multiple levels of decoding style: e.g., the main control unit generates 
the ALUOp bits, which then are used as input to the ALU control that 
generates the actual signals to control the ALU unit:– can reduce the size of the main control unit– may potentially increase the speed of the control unit by using several 
smaller control units– These optimizations are important, since the control unit is often 
performance-critical (clock cycle time)
Chapter 4.Part I 33 of 58
Patterson and Hennessy’s Computer Organization and Design, 5th Ed.
The Main Control Unit
• The control unit takes inputs and generates a write signal for state 
elements, the selector control for multiplexors, and the ALU control
• The control unit uses the 6-bit opcode field, Op [5:0], to generate 
these control signals
• MIPS ISA regularity and simplicity means that a simple decoding 
process can be used to determine how to set the control lines
• Control unit implementation is combinational
• The datapath operates in a single clock cycle and the signals within 
the datapath can vary unpredictably during the clock cycle
• Signals stabilize in the order of the flow of information
Chapter 4.Part I 34 of 58
Patterson and Hennessy’s Computer Organization and Design, 5th Ed.
The Main Control Unit (cont.)
Chapter 4.Part I 35 of 58
Patterson and Hennessy’s Computer Organization and Design, 5th Ed.
Individual Exercise (1)
• Determine whether any of the control signals in the 
single-cycle implementation can be eliminated and 
replaced by another existing control signal, or its inverse
Chapter 4.Part I 36 of 58
Patterson and Hennessy’s Computer Organization and Design, 5th Ed.
Individual Exercise (1): Answer
• Determine whether any of the control signals in the 
single-cycle implementation can be eliminated and 
replaced by another existing control signal, or its inverse– RegDst can be replaced by ALUSrc’, MemtoReg’, MemRead’, ALUop1– MemtoReg can be replaced by RegDst’, ALUSrc, MemRead, ALUOp1’– Branch and ALUOp0 can replace each other
Chapter 4.Part I 37 of 58
Patterson and Hennessy’s Computer Organization and Design, 5th Ed.
Individual Exercise (2)
• A friend is proposing to modify the single-cycle datapath
by eliminating the control signal MemtoReg
• The multiplexor that has MemtoReg as an input will 
instead use either the ALUSrc or the MemRead control 
signal
• Will your friend's modification work?
• Can one of the two signals (ALUSrc and MemRead) 
substitute for the other? Explain
Chapter 4.Part I 38 of 58
Patterson and Hennessy’s Computer Organization and Design, 5th Ed.
Individual Exercise (2): Answer
• A friend is proposing to modify the single-cycle datapath by 
eliminating the control signal MemtoReg. The multiplexor that has 
MemtoReg as an input will instead use either the ALUSrc or the 
MemRead control signal. Will your friend's modification work?– MemtoReg looks identical to both ALUSrc and MemRead signals, 
except for the don’t care entries, which have different settings 
for the other signals– A don’t care can be replaced by any signal; hence both signals 
can substitute for the MemtoReg signal
• Can one of the two signals (ALUSrc and MemRead) substitute for 
the other? Explain– Signals ALUSrc and MemRead differ in that sw sets ALUSrc (for 
address calculation) and resets MemRead (writes memory: 
cannot have a read and a write in the same cycle), so they 
cannot replace each other
Chapter 4.Part I 39 of 58
Patterson and Hennessy’s Computer Organization and Design, 5th Ed.
The Operation of the Datapath
• Although everything occurs in one clock cycle, we can think of four 
steps to execute the instructions
• These steps are ordered by the flow of information
• Execution steps for R-format instructions:
1. The instruction is fetched from the instruction memory, and the 
PC is incremented
2. Two register values are read from the register file using bits 
25:21 and 20:16 of the instruction to select the source 
registers
a) also, the main control unit computes the setting of the 
control lines during this step
3. The ALU operates on the data values read from the register 
file, using the function code (bits 5:0, which is the funct field, 
of the instruction) to generate the ALU function
4. The result from the ALU is written into the register file using 
bits 15:11 of the instruction to select the destination register
Chapter 4.Part I 40 of 58
Patterson and Hennessy’s Computer Organization and Design, 5th Ed.
The Operation of the Datapath (cont.)
• Execution steps for R-format instructions (cont.)
Chapter 4.Part I 41 of 58
Patterson and Hennessy’s Computer Organization and Design, 5th Ed.
The Operation of the Datapath (cont.)
• Execution steps for a lw instruction:
1. The instruction is fetched from the instruction memory, and the 
PC is incremented
2. A register value is read from the register file using bits 25:21 of 
the instruction to select the source register
a) also, the main control unit computes the setting of the 
control lines during this step
3. The ALU computes the sum of the value read from the register 
file and the sign-extended, lower 16 bits of the instruction
4. The sum from the ALU is used as the address for the data 
memory
5. The data from the memory unit is written into the register file 
using bits 20:16 of the instruction to select the destination 
register
Chapter 4.Part I 42 of 58
Patterson and Hennessy’s Computer Organization and Design, 5th Ed.
The Operation of the Datapath (cont.)
• Execution steps for a lw instruction (cont.):
Chapter 4.Part I 43 of 58
Patterson and Hennessy’s Computer Organization and Design, 5th Ed.
The Operation of the Datapath (cont.)
• Execution steps for a beq instruction:
1. The instruction is fetched from the instruction memory, and the 
PC is incremented
2. Two register values are read from the register file using bits 
25:21 and 20:16 of the instruction to select the source registers
a) also, the main control unit computes the setting of the 
control lines during this step
3. The ALU performs a subtract on the data values read from the 
register file
a) The value of PC+4 is added to the sign-extended, lower 16 
bits of the instruction shifted left by two, the result is the 
branch target address
4. The Zero result from the ALU is used to decide which adder 
result to store into the PC
Chapter 4.Part I 44 of 58
Patterson and Hennessy’s Computer Organization and Design, 5th Ed.
The Operation of the Datapath (cont.)
• Execution steps for a beq instruction (cont.):
Chapter 4.Part I 45 of 58
Patterson and Hennessy’s Computer Organization and Design, 5th Ed.
Implementing Unconditional Jumps
• An additional multiplexor is used with a new control signal: jump
2
1
2
1
4
5
3
Chapter 4.Part I 46 of 58
Patterson and Hennessy’s Computer Organization and Design, 5th Ed.
Home Exercise (3)
• Show how each of the following instructions uses the datapath?
add
lw
beq
$t1, $t2, $t3
$t1, 04 ($t2)
$t1, $t2, 34
• Work out the R-format example on Page 323 and in Figure 4.19 
step by step!
• Work out the lw example on Page 323 and in Figure 4.20 step by 
step!
• Work out the beq example on Page 323 and in Figure 4.21 step by 
step!
Chapter 4.Part I 47 of 58
Patterson and Hennessy’s Computer Organization and Design, 5th Ed.
Home Exercise (4)
• In the single-cycle datapath, each instruction uses a 
datapath element to carry out its execution
• Many of the datapath elements operate in series, using 
the output of another element as an input
• Some datapath elements operate in parallel
• Show which elements operate in parallel
Chapter 4.Part I 48 of 58
Patterson and Hennessy’s Computer Organization and Design, 5th Ed.
Group Exercise (5)
• We wish to add the instruction addi to the single-cycle 
datapath
• Add any necessary datapaths and control signals to the 
single-cycle datapath in Figure 4.17 (Slide 31)
• Show the necessary additions to the table in Figure 4.18 
(Slide 35)
Chapter 4.Part I 49 of 58
Patterson and Hennessy’s Computer Organization and Design, 5th Ed.
Group Exercise (5): Answer
• We wish to add the instruction addi to the single-cycle datapath
• Add any necessary datapaths and control signals to the single-cycle 
datapath in Figure 4.17 (Slide 31)
• Show the necessary additions to the table in Figure 4.18 (Slide 35)
• No additions to the datapath are required
• The new control is similar to– lwas we want to use the ALU to add the immediate to a register– an R-format instruction as we want to write the result of the 
ALU into a register and we are not branching or using memory
Instruction
R-
RegDst
fo
rm
ALUSrc
Memto
Reg
Reg
Write
Mem
Read
Mem
Write
Branch
ALUOp1
ALUOp0
at 1 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 0
lw 0 1 1 1 1 0 0 0 0
ad
di 0 1 0 1 0 0 0 0 0
Chapter 4.Part I 50 of 58
Patterson and Hennessy’s Computer Organization and Design, 5th Ed.
Group Exercise (6)
• We wish to add the instruction sll to the single-cycle 
datapath
• Add any necessary datapaths and control signals to the 
single-cycle datapath in Figure 4.24 (Slide 46)
• Show the necessary additions to the table in Figure 4.18 
(Slide 35)
Chapter 4.Part I 51 of 58
Patterson and Hennessy’s Computer Organization and Design, 5th Ed.
Group Exercise (6): Answer
• We wish to add the instruction sll to the single-cycle datapath
• Add any necessary datapaths and control signals to the single-cycle 
datapath in Figure 4.24 (Slide 46)
• Show the necessary additions to the table in Figure 4.18 (Slide 35)
• We need to add a new operation to the ALU
• We need to input the shamt field (Instruction [10:6]) to the ALU
ALUOp
10
Funct
00 0000
(sll)
ALU control
1110
(shift left logical)
Control action
Shift the second ALU operand ($rt) by 
the amount in the shamt field 
(Instruction [10-6]), input to the ALU
Chapter 4.Part I 52 of 58
Patterson and Hennessy’s Computer Organization and Design, 5th Ed.
Group Exercise (6): Answer (cont.)
Chapter 4.Part I 53 of 58
Patterson and Hennessy’s Computer Organization and Design, 5th Ed.
Inefficiencies in the Single-Cycle Implementation
• The clock cycle must have the same length for every instruction in the 
single-cycle design and the CPI will therefore be 1
• The clock cycle is determined by the critical path:– Critical path: the longest possible path in the processor– This path is almost certainly a load instruction, which uses 5 functional 
units in series:
1. the instruction memory, 
2. the register file (read),
3. the ALU, 
4. the data memory, and
5. the register file (write)
• The clock cycle is assumed equal to the worst-case delay for all instructions– It is useless to try implementation techniques that reduce the delay of 
the common case but do not improve the worst-case cycle time– A single-cycle implementation thus violates the key principle of making 
the common case fast
Chapter 4.Part I 54 of 58
Patterson and Hennessy’s Computer Organization and Design, 5th Ed.
Inefficiencies in the Single-Cycle Implementation (cont.)
• Although the CPI is 1, the overall performance of a single-cycle 
implementation is likely to be poor, since the clock cycle is too long 
and several of the instruction classes could fit in a shorter clock 
cycle
• If we had a processor with more powerful and complicated 
operations (like floating-point instructions) and addressing modes, 
instruction delays could vary a lot
• With this single-cycle implementation, each functional unit can be 
used only once per clock; therefore, some functional units must be 
duplicated, raising the cost of the implementation and wasting area
• So, a single-cycle implementation is inefficient in both its 
performance and its hardware cost!
Chapter 4.Part I 55 of 58
Patterson and Hennessy’s Computer Organization and Design, 5th Ed.
Inefficiencies in the Single-Cycle Implementation (cont.)
• The penalty for using the single-cycle design with a fixed clock cycle 
is significant
• Solutions:– Using variable length clocks, which is extremely difficult, and 
the overhead of it could be larger than any advantage gained!– Use a shorter clock cycle that does less work and then vary 
the number of clock cycles for different instruction classes– Use pipelining that uses a datapath very similar to the single
cycle datapath, but is much more efficient
• It gains efficiency by overlapping the execution of multiple 
instructions, increasing hardware utilization and throughput
• It improves performance
Chapter 4.Part I 56 of 58
Patterson and Hennessy’s Computer Organization and Design, 5th Ed.
Group Exercise (7)
• Assume that the operation times for the major functional 
units in the single-cycle implementation are the 
following:– 200 ps for memory access, – 200 ps for ALU and adders operation, – 100 ps for register file read or write, – multiplexors, control unit, PC accesses, sign extension 
unit, and wires have no delay
• What is the minimum clock period for an implementation 
in which every instruction operates in 1 clock cycle of a 
fixed length?
Chapter 4.Part I 57 of 58
Patterson and Hennessy’s Computer Organization and Design, 5th Ed.
Patterson and Hennessy’s Computer Organization and Design, 5th Ed. Chapter 4.Part I 58of 58
Group Exercise (7): Answer
• The critical path for the different instruction classes is as follows:
• Using these critical paths, the required clock cycle for each instruction is:
• The clock cycle for a processor with a single clock for all instructions will be 
determined by the longest instruction, which is 800 ps
Instruction
class
Instruction
fetch
Register
read
ALU
operation
Data
access
Register
write
Total
time
Load word (lw) 200 ps 100 ps 200 ps 200 ps 100 ps 800 ps
Store word (sw) 200 ps 100 ps 200 ps 200 ps 700 ps
R-format (ALU) 200 ps 100 ps 200 ps 100 ps 600 ps
Branch (beq) 200 ps 100 ps 200 ps 500 ps
Jump (j) 200 ps 200 ps
Instruction class Functional units used by the instruction class
Load word (lw) Instruction fetch Register access ALU Memory access Register access
Store word (sw) Instruction fetch Register access ALU Memory access
R-format (ALU) Instruction fetch Register access ALU Register access
Branch (beq) Instruction fetch Register access ALU
Jump (j) Instruction fetch