Short Answer Questions

What are the five major components of a computer? 

Which type of memory is used for caches to prioritize speed and technology compatibility? 

Which type of memory is used for main memory to prioritize high density and lower cost? 

Approximately how often does dynamic memory (DRAM) need to be refreshed? 

Which principle states that a recently referenced memory location will likely be referenced again soon? 

Which principle states that locations with nearby addresses will likely be referenced soon after a memory location is accessed? 

What is the minimum unit of information that can be present or missing in a cache? 

What term describes the fraction of memory accesses successfully found in a level of the memory hierarchy? 

What term describes the fraction of memory accesses that are not found in a level of the memory hierarchy? 

What hardware component typically manages the mapping between the cache and main memory? 

What software typically manages the mapping between main memory and disks? 

In a direct mapped cache, how many cache blocks can a specific memory block be mapped to? 

What happens to the miss rate when the block size becomes a significant fraction of the cache size? 

What three fields make up the total number of bits required in a direct-mapped cache? 

Which cache write policy writes data into both the cache block and the next level in the memory hierarchy? 

Which cache write policy writes data only into the cache block and utilizes a dirty bit? 

What type of cache miss is caused by the very first access to a block? 

What type of cache miss occurs when the cache simply cannot contain all the blocks accessed by a program? 

What type of cache miss occurs when multiple memory locations are mapped to the same exact cache location? 

Which write miss policy skips writing to the cache entirely and only writes the word to the write buffer? 

What does the acronym AMAT stand for in memory performance? 

Which cache type allows a memory block to be mapped to any available block in the cache? 

Which cache type divides the cache into sets where a memory block can be placed in any way within its assigned set? 

Which block replacement policy replaces the cache block that has gone unused for the longest period of time? 

What is the name of the small buffer used to hold the most recently discarded cache blocks?